[URL]Generations JournalWinter 202425Your Grandma Is Here for YouBy LaShawnDa PittmanFebruary 05, 2025TagsHealth & Well-beingEconomic SecurityAgeism & CultureAbstractThis article explores how grandmothers raising grandchildren in skipped-generation households fostered their healthy social and emotional development by helping them cope with emotional difficulties from parental absence and presence, grandfamily stigma, and prior adverse experiences. Grandmothers helped grandchildren cope by assuring them they could stay for as long as they wanted or by promising they (the grandmothers) would never leave; helping children reframe narratives about parental absence; using empathy and truth-telling to help children recover from sporadic parental involvement; allowing children to decide what to call their grandparents and how to explain their relationship; relying on talking/listening to create a sense of safety; and seeking institutional support.Key Wordssocial development, emotional development, parenting, coping strategies, grandparent caregiving, skipped-generation households, grandfamily, kinship careGrandmothers fostered healthy social and emotional development among their grandchildren in part by helping them cope with emotional difficulties resulting from three contributing factors: parental absence and presence, grandfamily stigma, and prior adverse experiences.Parental Absence and PresenceLike other children living in skipped-generation households, children in my study experienced a range of parental involvement, from no involvement to sporadic and regular involvement. Consequently, grandmothers confronted a range of childrens emotional responses, including separation anxiety and separation anxiety disorderthe latter characterized by extreme distress in the absence of a primary caregiver. Research has shown that children raised by grandparents often experience disrupted attachment relationships with their birth parents, placing them at increased risk for emotional distress (Blake et al., 2023).Although this piece brings attention to how grandmothers addressed childrens social and emotional difficulties, its important to note that the majority of grandmothers I interviewed insisted their grandchildren loved their mothers, even if they werent in their care, and some grandmothers mentioned the childrens attachment to their mothers. A minority of grandmothers made the same claims about the childrens love and attachment to their fathers.Grandfamily StigmaRegardless of increases in non-traditional familiesincluding grandfamilies, adoptive, same-sex, blended, married-like, cohabitating, and multigenerational familiesthe biological parentchild, nuclear, heterosexual family is still considered the ideal or normal family. Privileging the heteronormative, biological, nuclear family over non-traditional families is reflected in childrearing institutions, laws, and public policies, as well as in American social norms and values. Children whose family structures are characterized as non-traditional may experience feelings of marginalization if perceived as different. Thus, grandmothers often helped grandchildren cope with social stigma related to their family structure.Adverse ExperiencesGrandmothers also helped their grandchildren cope with the impact of adverse experiences on their social and emotional development. Often children faced numerous difficulties before coming into their grandmothers care. Previous research shows that the more adverse experiences in childhood (e.g., physical and emotional neglect; physical, sexual, and emotional abuse; mother treated violently; household substance abuse; household mental illness; parental separation or divorce; incarcerated household member), the greater the likelihood of developmental delays and other problems (Center on the Developing Child, 2007).In the next three sections, I discuss how grandmothers strategized to mitigate the impact of emotional difficulties on their grandchildrens social and emotional development.Dealing with Parental Absence and PresenceGrandmothers sought to fill the void created by parents inability or unwillingness to be there by being present, assuring grandchildren that they could stay with them for as long as they wanted, and/or promising that they would never leave. Fifty-year-old Dorothy, who used Child Protective Services and the police to become her grandsons legal guardian and keep him in her care, captured the essence of some of these assurances:He [her grandchild] said, Grandma, I dont wanna go with my mom. I wanna stay with you. And I said, You dont ever have to go anywhere else, you can stay with grandma. And when he seen his mother coming he said, Grandma, dont forget I wanna stay here. And I say, You dont ever have to go. You can stay right with grandma. Sixty-three-year-old Cora made a similar promise to her wary 15-year-old granddaughter:She sit down one day Girl, it hurt me so bad. She said, Everywhere I go somebody put me out. I say, Why you say that? My mama she puts me out. I say, Grandmamma neverll put you out. I said, I never will put you out. And she got like a lil smile on her face when I said that. That hurt me so bad. I never will forget that.Being there was complicated by the childrens separation anxiety and abandonment fears. Grandmothers combated separation anxiety by explaining any anticipated absence, reassuring the children that it would be temporary, or sneaking away in hopes that their temporary absence would go unnoticed and not cause further emotional harm. Although Barbara, 41, had been raising her 4-year-old grandson Shaquille since he was an infant, he still suffered from separation anxiety. Barbaras fianc had encouraged her to assume responsibility for Shaquille and helped her raise him until his recent imprisonment, which exacerbated Shaquilles separation anxiety.She explained, Anybody that he gets connected to he doesnt want them to leave because mama already gone, then daddy (grandmothers fianc) gone now. Its like, Oh is mommy [Barbara] gonna go, too? So, I have to reassure him mommy not going nowhere. The only way I leave you is when mommy go to heaven. I understand you dont want me to go but sometimes mommy have to go and mommy have to do things without you.Forty-one-year-old Sylvia was a grandmother who dealt with their grandchildrens separation anxiety by sneaking away. Although Zoe was a happy child, she struggled with separation anxiety, complicating Sylvias need for parenting breaks.Grandmothers negatively impacted by their grandchildrens emotional challenges negatively impacted their grandchildren.She said, When I snuck out the other night, my daughter watched her for me. She was by the door in her highchair, so I didnt go out that door, I went out this door. And my daughter said, Mama she was all like, Where grandma? Where grandma? And my daughter said, Mama, then she started getting all sad. She kept on saying, Grandma gone be back? Zoes sadness made Sylvia feel bad for taking her infrequent reprieves from caregiving. While the majority of grandmothers shared that they were attentive to childrens separation/reunion reactions, absent formal support, some were themselves negatively impacted by their grandchildrens emotional struggles. Sylvia was one of several who admitted to depression, feeling trappedat home with her granddaughter day in and day outwhich created a feedback loop: grandmothers negatively impacted by their grandchildrens emotional challenges negatively impacted their grandchildren.Eventually, Zoes clinging to her grandmothers every move caused Sylvias youngest child to regress emotionally as he vied for his mothers attention, illustrating how being there was complicated by the childrens emotional struggles and their impact on grandmothers and other household members.Grandmothers routinely faced the daunting task of explaining parents absence and helping grandchildren craft a perspective that would nurture, rather than undermine, their emotional well-being. Dorothy typified how grandmothers responded to the ongoing effects of parental absence:One time he said, Mama, why dont I see my mother and dad? They must be dead or something. I said, No, theyre just not around. He said, Mama, everybody else mama and daddy bring em to school. My grandmama brings me to school. And Im sad. I said, Be thankful to God that you got somebody to bring you to school. Your grandma is here for you. You gotta be thankful to God for that. Dorothy, like many others, also had to help her grandchild cope with parents presence; specifically, the negative effect of parents coming and going. Younger children acted out (e.g., tantrums, bed-wetting, potty accidents), and older children often blamed grandparents for non-reciprocal parental attachments. Whenever Dorothys grandsons mother Tyronica came around, he act[ed] out. And it take him a while to calm down. But I tell her [Tyronica], Thats his way of saying Im angry at you. Barbara helped her grandson Shaquille recover from his mother Talishas sporadic involvement and her behavior when she spent time with her son, including bringing him age-inappropriate gifts, showing up with different men, and showing up high on marijuana. She described:Sometimes when he would be with her, he would come back and have nightmares and his attitude would change. And he would regress. Because he was having accidents with her when he wasnt having it with mepotty accidents. And she would spank him. And he would come back and he would be crying, Oh, Im a No, baby. If you pee on yourself its alright. So, I had to fix that part. Because today he still cries if he about to have an accident. And like the nightmares she would leave him in the house while she go out. He wanna be with her but she sneaking out, then hed wake up and shes not there.Similarly, 58-year-old Lottie had to manage her three grandchildrens emotional well-being when their mother Rachel visited. Lotties 11-year-old granddaughter Audra wet the bed when her interactions with her mother upset her. Lottie shared how she created safety for her granddaughter, who was hesitant to tell her how she felt, saying,The only time shell wet like that is if her mama say something to her and then she dont come and tell me. Ill say, How come you didnt tell me? Mama told me not to tell you. I dont care what she says, she do something to you, you gotta come and tell me. Lottie routinely reprimanded Rachel for coming into her home screaming and hollering at her [Audra] and threatened to terminate her visiting. Grandmothers managed the delicate balance between not severing their grandchildren from their parents and using whatever power they had to shape these interactions. Lottie used her legal guardianship to prohibit Rachel from interacting with her children when she felt she was unsafe to be around.Grandmothers learned to be empathetic to the acting-out associated with parental visitations as well as to the negative behavior resulting from parents failing to visit. In both cases, they strived to balance understanding their grandchildrens experiences and arming them with the truth. The father of Laverne and Leonards five grandchildren had recently moved and gotten married. His childrens pre-existing difficulties dealing with his absence were exacerbated by his departure and new relationship. Laverne, 54, showed how sensitivity and talking were critical to helping children process difficult emotions, and how grandmothers changed their approach as children got older:Now that theyre getting bigger its a little rougher to deal with because when they were little we could just grab em and go to Chuck E. Cheese or go to the beach. Theyre too big for that now. Theyve started to see things more for themselves He (grandson) was trying to smell his tail as old folks used to say. So, I have to break things down to him every so often and catch my mouth and remember that he hurt, and he a child and dont understand. You just dont want me around my daddy. Baby, stop that lie. Dont never let nobody tell you that lie. Ive never stopped him from being around you or coming to get you or whatever. Dont ever let nobody tell you that I aint trying to fight nobody for nobody kids. I kept you for a reason; to keep you safe, to raise the five of you together as brothers and sisters. Grandmothers learned to be empathetic to the acting-out associated with parental visitations as well as to the negative behavior resulting from parents failing to visit.Children experienced a variety of reactions to parental absence, including anger, self-blame, emotional regression, acting out, and depression. When their individual coping strategies didnt work, grandmothers sought institutional support to help their grandchildren deal with their emotional difficulties.Laverne demonstrated grandmothers use of institutional support, returning to Michael Reese Hospital (where her grandchildren had been treated for minor illnesses and surgeries) when she noticed a change in her 14-year-old granddaughter Kebas behavior after spending time with her father:Well, I just recently took her and had her talk with a psychiatrist at Michael Reese Hospital. And he put her on this medication. I dont know. Keba got a lot of anger towards him (dad). But then she had a lot of love for him. So, things were just back and forth, back and forth. Then when she came back home, it was pretty much she brought some of it with her. And I just kept seeing different actions from her that concerned me, so I took her to the doctor. Mood swings. a difference in her behavior. She take her Lexapro three times a day and the other one she just take a half of it it seems to help keep her calmer. She dont fly off the handle as fast, as easy.Beulah, 58, was also managing her granddaughters response to not being in her parents care. Her experience spotlighted the importance of social service organizations offering services to kinship caregivers seeking treatment for grandchildren. For instance, in support groups, where grandmothers felt they could openly share their caregiving experiences, they learned a great deal about obtaining the resources and services their grandchildren so desperately needed. In Beulahs support group, grandmothers bounced ideas off one another before plotting a course of action. Concerned that her granddaughter was taking things from her to give to her mother, who was raising her six siblings, Beulah shared and was encouraged by fellow participants:And then there was a time where I had laid money on the table and the money walked off. And things that I put in the refrigerator and things would just walk off and just disappear. And nobody seems to understand where. I mean, even like gold, diamond rings, and all that kind of stuff was just disappearing out my home. So, I was talking to the other people about the incidents and things that happened. So, they say Well, Beulah, why dont you call LaRabida [a hospital known for helping troubled children] and see if you cant get a psychiatrist. Because its a lot of times stuff may be going on that you dont know. Childrens behavioral problems, especially habitual lying, stealing, anger, and acting-out in school, strained grandmothers capacity for empathy. These problems not only challenged grandmothers ability to exercise empathy, but also exceeded their personal resources. In these cases, many grandmothers resorted to informal support systems and institutional ties such as healthcare providers, caseworkers, and educators. Assistance from formal support consisted of assessments aimed at getting at the heart of childrens behavioral issues, advice on symptom-management, medication for symptoms, and mental health services. Grandmothers who sought institutional support were better able to care for children with complex behavioral and emotional conditions than those who did not.Managing Grandfamily StigmaExisting research focuses on the stigma grandparents experience as primary caregivers to their grandchildren (Hayslip et al., 2020); however, I found that grandmothers were less concerned about their own stigma than their grandchildrens. Although 41-year-old Sholanda and her husband had raised Dana since she was a newborn, Shalonda still introduced herself as Danas grandmother, which yielded a recent conversation with Dana. Shalonda explained:She got me in a corner and she said, Mama, I been intending to talk to you. Can you quit telling them people you my grandma? And I think maybe now shes at the age where like with school things and things that she do everybody there with their mother and father. So, she call us Mom and Dad so you wouldnt know unless we told you. So, she said, Can yall do that? So, I was like, Okay I aint got no problem with that. Because shell tell people if she wants them to know.Shalonda was one of many younger grandmothers who agreed to be called mama. Unfortunately, older grandmothers were unable to pass as mothers, making it more difficult for them to reduce a childs stigma, as 81-year-old Virginia described with her great-grandson:At school the other kids moms and dads are there. Who is there with him? His grandma. They say, Oh, Omar heres your grandma. It hurts. And the other day we went to his competition for the band, all the parents were there waiting in the cafeteria, because they had their solo competition. And Im sitting there. He had told his mother, this time she came. Gregory, one of his little classmates, he told Gregory when he came back from the judges, See, Gregory, I told you I had a mom! Isnt that sad? I wanted to cry.Marian, 74, had a different response to her great-granddaughter Milenas stigma. When Milenas teacher corrected her, telling her that her great-grandmother was not her mother, Marian pulled the teacher aside, telling her that it wasnt her call to make that distinction in front of other people. It makes her feel less than, or like shes deficient in some kind of way. Although Marian reprimanded Milenas teacher, she was unwilling to privilege parent-child families or to be complicit in further stigmatizing grandfamilies.She said, Milena started that crap with me, coming to pick her up. Everybody else saying mommy, so shes running up to me saying mommy. Because she wants to belong. And I greet her and I say, Ooh, shes not here. But Im here. And who am I? Well, I know, youre grandma, butI said, Mmm hmm, yeah. And guess what? I love you two times and they only said love them one time. Until she can understand it.Marian didnt stop at damage control with her great-granddaughter but worked to change the perception of grandfamilies among the children in her school:And then I made myself visible more, in terms of her field trips and just volunteering, until the other kids began to want to be with me more than they wanted to be with their mommies, because their mommies were at work. Now, legitimately, their mommies could not be there . But because I was there, Milena saw me as a positive and then the kids saw me as a positive.Marian worked to change the perception of grandfamilies among the children in her school.Grandmothers responded to the stigma their grandchildren experienced being raised in a non-traditional family by agreeing to be called mama, letting their grandchildren decide with whom to share the true nature of their relationship, and trying to mitigate other peoples responses to their family structure. When these strategies failed or when grandmothers were too old to be seen as mothers, grandmothers encouraged their grandchildren to give thanks for having grandparents and other relatives to love and care for them.Caring for Children with a History of Adverse ExperiencesThe circumstances surrounding childrens transition into grandparents care made it important for grandmothers to be sensitive to the impact of any adverse experiences on their grandchildren. Because they saw children as victims of their circumstances, grandmothers went to great lengths to cause no additional harm, including not using physical discipline (or using it significantly less) even if they had done so with their own children. Instead, grandmothers stressed listening and talking to their grandchildren to create a sense of safety.Faith, 48, had been raising her 3-year-old granddaughter, Schuyler, for a year because of Schuylers parents drug addiction, related criminal activity, neglect, and abuse. Faith described the difference between raising her three children (including Schuylers father) and her granddaughter: Because mines, I had to look at them and they knew. I didnt have to open my mouth. This one, I could look at her and she still does. Faith spent more time talking and explaining things to Schuyler than with her own children, with whom she resorted to using physical discipline to get them to behave:Because shes been through so much and I dont want to mistreat her. thats not gone be fair to her, she needs to grow up a happy young lady. She doesnt need to be mistreated; shes already been mistreated for the first two years of her life. Actually, not the first two years but when she was in her mama belly.When Faith mentioned that she didnt want to mistreat her granddaughter, what she meant was that Schuyler wasnt as well-behaved as her children had been and she didnt want to use physical discipline to make Schuyler behave. Faith took into consideration that Schuyler hadnt been taught how to behave by her parents, which meant that she couldnt have the same expectations that she had for her own children. Faith also took into consideration that Schuyler had a history of abuse.Most grandmothers described using talking to get an understanding with their grandchildren, which, as Cora explained, meant addressing disciplinary and behavioral issues without resorting to physical discipline:I dont beat my grandchildren. We can talk and get that understanding. Thats the greatest thing in the world But you dont have to beat no child just all the time, just hurting them kids! You can just sit down and talk with them.While Cora admitted to popping (using her hand to hit them on the bottom) her grandchildren, she distinguished it from whipping or beating them. Instead, she communicated her expectations for and corrected her grandchildrens behavior by talking to them about it.Consistent with other research, getting an understanding required grandmothers to be explicit with language and to talk to grandchildren instead of at them. Marian provided this powerful example, which also illustrates the value she places on maintaining eye contact when communicating:I dont have to hit Milena. I can say Come here. She hates for me to get down on my knees and look at her face. She hates it, you ought to see it, she just wilts like a flower. I get in her face, and I say to her, How many times did I tell you to do that? Do you think Im playing with you? Did you not hear what I said to you? And when I talk low like that, she dont like it. And she just cringes. And shell think about it and shell say, Grandma, Im sorry. I apologize. Would you forgive me? And I say Yeah. Like the grandmothers in Social Work Professor Priscilla Gibsons (2005) research on the ways in which grandmothers raising their grandchildren used communication in their parenting, grandmothers in my study listened to their grandchildren.Because kids got a right to say something to you as well as you have something to say to that child, Cora explained. A child can tell you something. I tell my kids, Grandma got all ears. All we can do is sit down here and talk about it. They trust me. Coras willingness to listen made it safe for her grandchildren to bring her their cares and concerns. Similarly, Marian created an environment where her great-granddaughter could express herself and share her feelings:And then shell come to me and say That was not nice, what you said to me, and I think you owe me an apology. And Ill say to her, Well, let me think about it. Mmm hmm. and I say, Milena, you know, you were absolutely right. I apologize and will you forgive me? She says, yes and then were okay.Grandmothers also used talking to create safety for children grappling with the effects of trauma, as 58-year-old May did to help her 7-year-old granddaughter, McKayla:When she [granddaughter] first moved in with me ... she would have these nightmares about people doing things to her. And I had to sit her down and explain to her, Look, Im not gonna let nobody bother you or hurt you. Your daddys not gonna let nobody hurt you! Your uncle Deangelos not gonna let nobody hurt you, and your auntie Maura. Nobodys gonna hurt you. May was sensitive to the fact that McKayla been through a lot. Because like I say, she didnt get to be a baby. In addition to using talking to create safety for McKayla, May used it to teach and re-teach her:Shes so mature. It rained last week and she said, I can see the rainbow in the bathroom window and the clouds and everything, and I made a wish. And I wished I had a baby. I said, Girl, you 7 years old, the only baby you're gonna get is through those dolls you got upstairs! Miss Dora the Explorer. Thats it! May interpreted McKaylas desire for a baby as too mature, given her age. So, she redirected her to baby her dolls, not to having a baby of her own. Like other grandmothers, May used talking to impart knowledge that corrected misinformation about appropriate thoughts and behaviors that came from parents or others, and from being in what grandmothers perceived as toxic environments. When McKayla urged her grandmother to also make a wish on the rainbow, May also used it as an opportunity to teach her to direct her wishes to God.ConclusionWhen grandmothers confronted issues beyond their grasp or when talking was ineffective, they recognized their inability to create safety, address disciplinary and behavioral issues, and teach and re-teach on their own. The rapport they built with their grandchildren, while critical to their social and emotional foundations, would not protect them in the world beyond their door. In these cases, grandmothers elicited support from their informal and formal networks to provide boy children with role models for manhood, to help children heal from various forms of abuse, to encourage their grandchildren to listen to them, and to reinforce the lessons they were trying to impart. Grandmothers also advocated on their grandchildrens behalf by strategically navigating and using the legal system, healthcare professionals, caseworkers, and kinship support groups to get them the resources and services they needed.LaShawnDa Pittman, PhD, is an associate professor of Ethnic Studies and the Joff Hanauer Honors Professor of Western Civilization at the University of Washington in Seattle.Photo credit: Shutterstock/Monkey Business ImagesReferencesBlake, A. J., Infurna, F. J., Castro, S. A., Webster, B. A., Dolbin-MacNab, M. L., Smith, G. C., Crowley, D. M., & Musil, C. (2023). Intergenerational patterns of attachment in custodial grandfamilies.Journal of Family Psychology, 37(8), 11481158.https://doi.org/10.1037/fam0001150Center on the Developing Child (2007).The impact of early adversity on child development(InBrief).www.developingchild.harvard.eduGibson P.A. (2005). Intergenerational parenting from the perspective of African American grandmothers.Family Relations, 54(2), 280297.https://doi:10.1111/j.0197-6664.2005.00022Hayslip Jr, B., Knight, R. P., Page, K. S., & Phillips, C. (2020). Thematic dimensions of grandparent caregiving: A focus group approach.Grandfamilies: The Contemporary Journal of Research, Practice and Policy, 6(1), 116.You may also likeGenerations JournalWinter 202425Advocating for Grandparents Who Step in to ParentBy Alison BiggarGenerations JournalWinter 202425The Power of Strength: A Tribute to My Grandmother and All GrandparentsA Personal ReflectionBy Jean C. AcciusGenerations JournalWinter 202425A Glimpse into the Lives of African American Grandmothers Caring on the MarginsBy Gaynell M. SimpsonGenerations JournalWinter 202425A Case Study of Compound Caregiving by an African American GrandmotherBy Tina L. Dothard PetersonPitch UsRSS FeedCopyright 2023 Genereation