[URL]Generations JournalWinter 202425Getting Grandchildren Back on Their FeetBy LaShawnDa PittmanFebruary 05, 2025TagsHealth & Well-beingEconomic SecurityEquity & JusticeAbstractThis article examines how grandmothers raising grandchildren in skipped-generation households tended to their grandchildrens physical development, including 1) treating illnesses and injuries; 2) alleviating malnourishment and teaching healthy eating habits; and 3) managing prenatal substance exposure. Childrens physical needs often required grandmothers to interact with healthcare providers, which required demonstrating proof of legal authority. Grandmothers raising grandchildren must overcome legal complications to tend to their grandchildrens physical needs, and they did so by using Child Protective Services to become legal guardians, devising strategies to overcome their lack of legal authority, and taking on the caregiving arrangements required by the state.Key Wordsphysical development, physical needs, prenatal substance exposure, parenting, grandparent caregiving, skipped-generation households, grandfamily, kinship care, legal rights/authorityAt first, they were so sick. They were so sick . So, I got em back on they feet. I got em on they feet.Cheryls description of the state of her five grandchildrens health when they entered her care echoed the experiences of many of the grandmothers raising grandchildren whom I interviewed on the South Side of Chicago. Childrens unanticipated health demands required grandmothers to go beyond preparing healthy meals, curing routine ailments (colds, flu, broken limbs), and ensuring regular doctor check-ups.In many cases, caring for childrens health involved 1) treating illnesses and injuries; 2) alleviating malnourishment and teaching healthy eating habits; and 3) managing prenatal substance exposure. Getting and keeping their grandchildren healthy often involved accessing healthcare, which required that grandmothers demonstrate proof of legal authority. To access healthcare they presented the childs medical card, provided proof of legal guardianship, and/or used their Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS) paperwork or used a caseworker. In lieu of legal rights, they devised strategies such as building trusted relationships with medical providers, relying on parents, and giving verbal confirmation of legal authority even when they did not have it.Treating Illnesses and InjuriesCheryl, whose quote begins this article, described her five grandchildrens health when she assumed responsibility for them:Shandra had ringworm all in her head, all over her body. And Jamal had ringworm stuck all on his skin ... from sleeping on the floor on nasty stuff. I took em to the doctor. I put antibacterial on it and all. I went through shit. And they was half-eating. They used to half-eat.Cheryl, 52, took pride in nurturing her grandchildren (Tevin, 19; Keith, 16; Shandra, 13; Jamal, 10; and Sienna, 8) back to health.She said, Sienna just as fat now as she could be. She big, she weighs more than Jamal. And Shandra you look at her how much you think she weigh? She 13 years old and weigh 273 pounds. Cheryl was able to get her grandchildren medical attention by calling DCFS and was given the number to the guardianship program ... they come out, fill the papers out, and told me I had to go to court in front of the judge. And thats how I got it.Like many grandmothers, Cheryl became her grandchildrens legal guardian to ensure they remained in her care and to secure desperately needed resources and services, specifically public aid benefitsmedical cards, cash assistance, and Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). In addition to getting proper diagnoses for her grandchildren and treatment for their developmental disabilities and other medical conditions (eczema, vision problems, and asthma) Cheryl was able to get Supplemental Security Income (SSI) for her grandson Tevin. At the time of the interview, Cheryl was in the process of taking Shandra to the La Rabida Hospital and putting her on that weight-loss program.Michelle, 47, didnt know she was a grandmother until one day her son Curtis called and said, Mama, I need a favor. Mama, see I got a son. I only got one child by her. And DCFS aint quite in her life, but its been in her life. So, Im gonna need you, if you can, take care of my son.Not only did Curtis need his mother to take care of his son Efrem, but he also needed her to manage her grandsons child welfare system involvement. Efrems mother, Khalima, had four other children who were all in the care of relatives serving as kinship foster care providers. The reason the initial DCFS case was opened was never made clear to Michelle. But both the caseworker who contacted Michelle and Khalima shared a similar story that largely had to do with living in impoverished conditions, neglect, and not fulfilling the permanency plan (also known as reunification program or case plan) needed to get her children back.Permanency plans are services that must be fulfilled by parents to be reunited with their children, including parenting classes, rehab, therapy sessions, and so on. According to the caseworker, Khalima wasnt applying to her service, the house had too many inhabitants, the babys not properly in clothing. The baby nasty. The babys not eating properly, and it was Curtis who takes care of the baby most of the time. Khalima either there or not there.Sixty-three-year-old Marthas story exemplifies how some childrens injuries that grandmothers had to get treated were caused by a parent.Voluntary placement agreements (VPAs) can be voluntarily agreed upon by parents or guardians without formal removal of children from their homes and placement into kinship care; or when children are constructively removed from their parents or guardians home while they are being looked after by another caregiver on a temporary basis (Pittman, 2023, p. 263). For Michelle, the shock of being a new grandmother, a young grandmother, and a grandmother of a grandchild who came into her care through a voluntary placement agreement was complicated by trying to get the required documentation (birth certificate, medical card) to care for an infant. She had only recently received his temporary medical card when Efrem had his first asthma attack in her care.She described, So, within that time [of seeking the necessary documentation] one night he started gasping. Im like, Baby, whats wrong with you? He was coughing a lot, so I thought it was a cold, but he was starting to change color, and Im like, Oooh we got to take him to the emergency room. Shot him to the emergency room. Come to find out he was getting an asthma attack Lord forgive me with the words, Them kids didnt let me know a damn thing ... Making me go through all of this! Thats the first thing they should have told me about. Well mama he got this and you know? Lord Jesus, at the hospital, Who is the mama? Wheres the mama? I am the mama right now. No, you dont know all that paperwork. I said, [Laughter] Right now he just needs to be seen.I said, Im the guardian. Im the grandmother. [They said,] Okay. Well grandmama just calm down. Hes just goin through an asthma attack. We just gonna put him on a machine. And he fightin and stuff like that. Dont want it on his face and stuff. Got to hold him down. And, tryin to get him to breathe, and finally, she gave him a couple of Tylenol, Motrin, and he calmed down.Michelle was simultaneously furious and afraid. They kept Efrem overnight, connected Michelle with his pediatrician, and gave her one of the breathing inhalers, pump sprays like that. And told me to spray at the first sign of coughing most time, thats how it starts, the cough starts coming in and stuff like that.After being scolded by Michelle, Curtis and Khalima brought her Efrems asthma medications. As Michelle cared for Efrem over the next 3 years, she continued to manage his asthma and got him treated for vision problems.Sixty-three-year-old Marthas story exemplifies how some childrens injuries that grandmothers had to get treated were caused by a parent. Martha learned from her oldest daughter, Terri, that Kellen (a grandson who Martha had raised) and his girlfriend, Erika, were abusing their 1-year-old twins, Akram and Akria, and 2-year-old Phallon. She was told of and later witnessed the parents neglecting, beating, and verbally abusing the children but did not live close enough to intervene.With the childrens grandmother unwilling to assume responsibility for her grandchildren and Erika estranged from her family, Martha saw no alternative but to increase her involvement with her great-grandchildren. But at that point, her intentions were only to help the young couple parent better. Martha got an opportunity to intervene when Kellen asked if he could come home. She rented a truck, moved Kellen and his family into her home, gave them a room, and confirmed her suspicion of child abuse. But, Martha reasoned, Erika was also contending with intergenerational trauma:They was neglecting em. They was beatin the little 2-year-old girl. One time she [Erika] had whipped her so until that baby had bruises all on her back. ... I think somethings wrong with her [Erika] because she came up in the system. Everybody came up in the system is not bad, but ... she was abused before she got in the system.Since Erika had been sexually abused by her mothers boyfriend, Martha reasoned that she might not view her behavior as abusive. But when Martha tried to provide parental guidance, Erika made it clear that she did not want to be told how to raise her children. I had to call the police on her, Martha disclosed, because she had even threatened me.Eventually Martha realized that she could no longer keep her great-grandchildren safe in her capacity as their grandmother. Despite Marthas compassion for Erika, she could not permit child abuse: And I talked to her, I pleaded with her. And I told her if they keep on, I was gonna call DCFS on em. So, I did.When, like so many grandmothers in this study, she was pushed to using or threatening to use punitive institutions to protect her grandchildren, Martha called DCFS, and Kellen and his family left her home. When, a week later, they returned because they had nowhere else to go, Martha told them the children were welcome, but not Erika.She said, They wouldnt even bring me they shot records because they hadnt been taking the kids to the doctor. I had a hard time. She called a local social service agency providing support to kinship caregivers and they helped her become her great-grandchildrens legal guardian and to gain access to the resources and services the children needed.Martha stated, They wouldnt let me take em to the doctor and I knew the kids needed to go to the doctor. They wasnt sick or anything but they needed to go to the doctor and I was worried about they shots. So, they [social service agency staff] told me how to go about getting medical cards for the kids. I got the medical cards for the kids and the kids is on my food stamps . So its just that they needed medical attention and to help me buy food.Martha, Michelle, and Cheryls stories show that because of the often abrupt and unexpected nature of grandparent caregiving, grandmothers frequently had to immediately address their grandchildrens neglected health. Their stories demonstrate the necessity of legal authority (or strategies in the absence of legal authority) among grandparents trying to get their grandchildren the healthcare they needed.Alleviating MalnourishmentMalnourished children were described by grandmothers as small for their age or barely eating. Their poor and irregular eating habits were evident in stunted growth, rotten teeth, and difficulty consuming healthy foods. In response, grandmothers went to great lengths to ensure their grandchildren were adequately fed.Lottie, 58, and her husband had been compelled to provide care when Lotties newborn granddaughter Audra tested positive for drug exposure and the hospital contacted DCFS, who transferred care of Lotties three grandchildren to her via kinship diversion (where children are diverted to kinship care as an alternative to being brought into state custody [formal foster care]. It is used interchangeably with terms such as safety planning, voluntary kinship care, parental placement, redirection, informal kin care, and prevention services.).I got attached to her [Dana] ... I would literally go [to her parents home] and make sure she ate I was gonna make sure she ate.When Rachel couldnt regain custody because of substance addiction and untreated mental illness, Lottie became their legal guardian. Lottie described how her two grandsons (9-year-old Garrian and 7-year-old Joshua) were malnourished when they entered her care, as well as her strategy for nurturing them back to health:When I got em they were real thin. I told em, God, yall are so skinny you could pass between two blocks of rain and not even get wet. So, when I started to feed em I say, You eat til you get full. So now they full because they big. Before becoming her grandchildrens primary caregiver, Lottie participated in the EarnFare program, which is designed to provide adults who receive SNAP benefits and who volunteer an opportunity to gain valuable work experience, earn cash assistance, and become self-sufficient (Illinois Department of Human Services, n.d.). After assuming responsibility for her grandchildren, Lottie parlayed her volunteer experience into a full-time job at a branch agency of DCFS. She relied on her job, which not only paid her but gave her access to the food pantry, to keep her grandchildren well fed.Audra, she likes sardines. She loves them so I get little snacks like that. Then I got one thats allergic to peanut butter and one thats allergic to shrimp, any kind of seafood. So, Im saying, I try to build my little grocery thing around whatever yall need now come and ask me.Audra, Garrian, and Joshua were 11, 17, and 15 at the time the interview was conducted, and Lottie took comfort in that they all good, they in good health.When 41-year-old Shalonda decided to care for her newborn granddaughter, Dana, it was because of the home conditions of Danas parents. In addition to their home being unclean and having rodents, Shalonda was dismayed that Danas parents werent adequately feeding her. Shalonda described how the culmination of these circumstances compelled her to become her granddaughters legal guardian:I got attached to her [Dana] ... I would literally go [to her parents home] and make sure she ate I was gonna make sure she ate. I didnt take her home without feeding her. If she went home! I even was paying bills over there to make sure they had a phone so I could check on her.Eventually, Danas mother began to leave the infant in Shalondas care for extended periods of time: So, I just kinda took her and then when the daycare was up and I couldnt take her I just called up here at child parent neglect. When I interviewed her, Shalonda had been raising Dana for 7 years.Faith, 48, described her granddaughter Schuylers state when she called DCFS upon learning the child had a black eye:When they [DCFS] took her out, she was muddyand when I say muddy, she was dripping with pee-pee and dirt. No shoes on. Pamper was sagging like she had the Pamper on for about three days. And her hair was all over her head She was screaming and hollering too. They jumped in the car and took her straight to the hospital She was unnourished, teeth was rotten; teeth still is rotten across the top.After leaving the hospital, Schuyler spent 7 months in a non-relative foster home. When Faith became Schuylers foster parent, she prioritized nurturing her back to health: Yeah, my daughter say when they [parents] was staying with her that the girl went and bought about 13 gallons of that juice. No milk. No food.They also fed the toddler fast food. Faith made sure that 3-year-old Schuyler ate real food, regardless of whether she felt like cooking: Sometimes I dont feel like putting anything in my mouth, but I still make a meal for her because I have to make sure that she eats regardless if I want to eat or not I dont feel like it, but I do cook. Faith was also addressing Schuylers rotten teeth: I took her to the dentist, but she need some kind of caps for rotten teeth.Grandmothers also instituted unfamiliar daily regimens, creating conflict with grandchildren and testing their own patience. May, 58, described what it was like introducing her granddaughter to healthy foods:I cook, but she be wanting that frozen dinner mess because she so used to having frozen dinners. And like she like oodles and noodles and Vienna sausages, peanut butter and jelly, and bologna. My kids didnt even eat that mess. I got up and I cooked seven-course meals. She getting into it, but sometimes she tell me, I dont eat that. I said look, I dont run no restaurant. [Laughs.] You dont wanna eat that, you just aint gonna eat.Despite her own poor health, May wanted to make sure that her granddaughter was well nourished and accustomed to real food. So, she cooked for her every day. She also let her tantrum while insisting on healthy foods. Although McKayla was 7, May maintained that last year she couldve got on the bus and passed as a 4-year-old. Thats how small she was. McKayla was still wearing sizes 4 or 5T [toddlers].Grandmothers cooked for their grandchildren, whether they felt like it or not, and often despite their own poor health, to nurture their grandchildren back to health. They catered to their dietary cravings, but also bore the brunt of childrens anger in the absence of the junk food they may have been accustomed to.Managing Prenatal Substance ExposureTwenty-one parents in my study were grappling with substance addiction and two more were in recovery and rehabilitation. What this meant for some of the grandmothers that I interviewed was that they 1) needed to rescue their grandchildren from being taken into state custody (mostly as kinship foster care providers or through kinship diversion); and 2) had to manage the impact of prenatal substance exposure on childrens health, which ranged from no impact to lifelong developmental disabilities.Helens experience typified what happened when grandmothers stepped in to raise a grandchild because of prenatal substance exposure, which didnt negatively impact the childs health. When her newborn grandson Ebere was born with prenatal substance exposure, Helen, 48, assumed primary responsibility for him through kinship diversion. According to Helen, Eberes mother Sonya struggled with an untreated mental illness. Moreover, when she gave birth to Ebere, she couldnt be left alone with him because someone had put something in her weed causing her to trip off.What was that like? I did not believe what I was doing. Hell, this aint my child!Given her state, Helen didnt expect much help from Sonya with respect to raising Ebere, but she did expect her 27-year-old son Nicholasthe boys fatherwho was living with her at the time, to help her care for the baby. But when she asked Nicholas to take him to the clinic or get the WIC (Women, Infants and Children Supplemental Nutrition), he would tell her things like I aint got time for that.So, she became responsible for ensuring that Ebere got to his doctors appointments and got the resources he needed, including applying for a medical card. Helen only had to take him to the doctor if he was sick ... If he got sick with a cold or anything Id take him. When I asked what it was like when she first got her newborn grandson she shared:Oh, let me see what was that like? I did not believe what I was doing. Hell, this aint my child! [Laughs.] Shit. I was like this is not my child . Ill tell you its a trip. I am angry somewhat because its stopped my life It was hell and back. (Chuckles.) Hell and back. This was a newborn child. Im not young no more. I could still deal with it if I choose to deal with it, but this is forced on me to deal with.Ebere was attached to his grandmother to the point that he rarely left her side apart from her working and him attending daycare. Helen described him as real smart. Theres nothing he cant catch on. She acknowledged that while some children born with prenatal substance exposure got some issues, I guess it didnt affect him like that. At the time of the interview, Ebere had been in her care for 5 years and was just beginning to sleep in the bed shed bought him. Nicholas lack of involvement worsened when he began to use the crack he was selling. Helens need to navigate childrearing institutions without having to track him down led her to obtain guardianship of her grandson.Fifty-one-year-old Tamara was raising four of her grandchildren (ages 18, 17, 10, and 8) as a kinship adoptive parent. Ladonna, one of Tamaras four children, lost her children to state custody because of her substance addiction. When Tamara first stepped in, the oldest three children stayed in the system about seven months. I never missed a visit. I never missed a court date. I love my grandkids and thats the only way I could see em they dont give us no visits.The DCFS caseworker helped Tamara become the childrens unlicensed kinship foster care provider. Soon after Tamara assumed responsibility for her three grandchildren, Ladonna had another baby: The hospital called, I go pick him up. And after then she went crazy. Every nine months she was having a baby. Ladonna had 13 children, and Tamara and her partner of 12 years couldnt take them all, a decision she still struggled with.I couldnt deal with all those kids. And she got one, two, three she got three handicapped kids. And I couldnt do that. You know that take a lot of time. My hip messed up now I prayed to God. I said, God, dont feel like this is something that I didnt wanna do. I just cant do it. A family member took three of the children and the rest were placed in non-relative foster care. Tamara shared her experience of dealing with DCFS as she cared for her grandchildren with prenatal substance exposure:You got drug-ridden children. You know cause I got em. You know they hyper. You constantly got to run, run, run, get this medicine for them. You got to sit up in these meetings. You got to pay out your pocket to get there. They dont come bring you no bus card. You got to do that yourself. And if you care anything about this child, youre gonna get em there. You know because its bad when you see your child or your grandbaby, if you care anything about em, just laying in there rockin and cryin, just rockin and cryin. She continued, And theyre busting out in sweat and stuff and youre praying to God, what can I do for this child? When theyre having withdrawals. You know? I done been there. I got two of em in the back. And they were, I just look at em, some growin out of them now but I feel like itll be there for the rest of their lives. They dont know. They just bring those kids to us, and they drop em off and do a lot of paperwork and come back the next month and look and see if theyre ok. If the house is clean. Everythings A-okay. Its not A-okay. Its not.Tamara divulged that years later, she could still see the impact of prenatal substance exposure on two of her grandchildren. Since caring for them, she had gotten her grandchildren the care they needed by explaining her status as a grandmother and by demonstrating her legal authority (e.g., DCFS documentation and the childrens medical cards): I have no problem. Even when I say, Im their grandmother. Because basically the hospitals and the schools they know whats going on with these six kids [her 4 grandchildren and 2 great-grandchildren] so At the time of the interview, Tamara had been her grandchildrens adoptive parent for 8 years.Eighty-one-year-old Louise became the licensed foster parent and later the adoptive parent of three of her grandchildren when their mother Melissa refused to take training courses to help her care for her premature, substance-exposed baby. Fearing that she might get into trouble, Melissa left Cole at the hospital and the doctors contacted DCFS. When DCFS investigated, they removed Cole and his two older siblings from Melissas care because of her substance addiction. Because Clinton, the childrens father and Louises son, was in prison, it was up to Louise to undergo training to care for Cole.She said, His mother left him at the hospital. He didnt weigh 2 pounds. He was tiny, tiny, tiny. ... when I got him, he was 8 months old ... And he was hooked up to everything, too. He had a heart monitor, he had oxygen ... he just had everything. I had to take the training for his inhalation therapy and everything to work with him.Louise remembered being contacted by a caseworker and going down to Michael Reese Hospital where the caseworker puts them two [12-year-old Sophia and 10-year-old Clinton Jr.] in my hands. She gave her some little medical cards for them so that she could take them to the dentist and doctor. In addition to carrying around Coles heavy iron oxygen tank, Louise had to carry him in a special-needs stroller, which was heavier and more cumbersome than a traditional stroller. As a single grandmother caring for her three grandchildren in the wake of the recent death of her husband of more than 40 years, Louise remarked of those early days, It was rough.At the time of the interview, Louise was still undergoing training to care for her 14-year-old grandson, who had been enrolled in Special Education classes his entire school tenure. These courses, facilitated by the DCFS and Illinois State Board of Education, were designed to assist caregivers in attending to developmental disorders and navigating the Special Education system.Helens, Tamaras, and Louises stories show the ways in which prenatal substance exposure required grandmothers to care for grandchildren with child welfare system involvement. Consistent with other research, the children in this study being cared for in the formal kinship care system were more likely to have experienced more severe child maltreatment than children being cared for by grandmothers who provide informal kinship care (Pittman, 2023).ConclusionWhen thrust into the primary caregiving role, grandmothers expected that meeting their grandchildrens needs would be challenging given their age, poor health, limited resources, and, for many, their struggle to accept the idea that they were raising a child all over again. Still, they revived old childrearing strategies and devised new ones to respond to their grandchildrens physical needs. They sought healthcare for grandchildren with illnesses and injuries in much the same way they had for their own children, but they also devised strategies to overcome their lack of legal authority or provided proof of legal authority so that their grandchildren could get the medical treatment they needed.Importantly, the grandmothers in my study had limited (if any) access to nonpunitive institutions (the police and CPS) to obtain the legal rights they needed to provide adequate care. Their stories demonstrate the legal complications grandparents faced as they tended to their grandchildrens physical needs. Still, grandmothers took pride in fattening up malnourished children and exercised patience as they acclimated their grandchildren to healthier foods.Grandmothers caring for children with prenatal substance exposure managed kinship foster care or kinship diversion and took on the caregiving arrangements required by the state.Also emerging from my data was a picture of the way in which the unanticipated demands of care work could prove to be too much not only for grandmothers individual resources, but also for those in their familial and extended kinships networks. Thus, grandmothers used institution-based networks to get their grandchildren assessed and treated, seeking institutional assistance for their grandchildren based on their ability to meet eligibility criteria, convenience, and familiarity.LaShawnDa Pittman, PhD, is an associate professor of American Ethnic Studies and the Joff Hanauer Honors Professor of Western Civilization at the University of Washington in Seattle.Photo credit: Shutterstock/Gendis ImagesReferencesIllinois Department of Human Services. n.d.EarnFare.https://www.dhs.state.il.us/page.aspx/?item=31772Pittman, L. (2023).Grandmothering while black: A twenty-first century story of love, coercion, and survival. University of California Press.You may also likeGenerations JournalWinter 202425Advocating for Grandparents Who Step in to ParentBy Alison BiggarGenerations JournalWinter 202425The Power of Strength: A Tribute to My Grandmother and All GrandparentsA Personal ReflectionBy Jean C. AcciusGenerations JournalWinter 202425A Glimpse into the Lives of African American Grandmothers Caring on the MarginsBy Gaynell M. SimpsonGenerations JournalWinter 202425A Case Study of Compound Caregiving by an African American GrandmotherBy Tina L. Dothard PetersonPitch UsRSS FeedCopyright 2023 Genereation